When you think of aquatic mammals, do you think of a whale or an otter? In truth, there are a number of mammals who rely on water for hunting and fishing, as well as those who spend their entire lives in the sea. Although they may look like fish, dolphins and whales are in fact mammals -- they are warm blooded, have very fine hairs on their bodies, and produce milk to feed their young. While they never emerge from the water, however, other sea mammals like seals and sea lions divide their time equally between water and land, using it for both for fishing and for fun.
Whales in captivity which were captured from different oceans often suffer "culture shock" when forced to share an enclosure. Scientists believe that, just like people, whales from different parts of the world speak their own language, so that animals of the same species can't understand each other.

Dolphins are aquatic mammals related to whales and porpoises, famous for their intelligence, apparent compassion, and joy. The name is from Ancient Greek de?f?? (delphis) meaning "with a womb", viz. "a 'fish' with a womb". A group of dolphins can be called a "school" or a "pod".

There are almost 40 species of dolphin in 17 genera. They are found worldwide, mostly in the shallower seas of the continental shelves, and are carnivores, mostly eating fish and squid. The family Delphinidae is the largest in the Cetacea, and relatively recent: dolphins evolved about 10 million years ago, during the Miocene period.
They vary in size from 1.2 m (4 ft) and 40 kg (88 lb) (Maui's dolphin), up to 9.5 m (30 ft) and 10 tonnes (the Orca). However, the average length for most North American species is 13.89 feet in length. Most species weigh about 50 to 200 kg (110 to 440 lb). 
The smartest animal? Dolphins are widely believed to be among the most intelligent of all animals, though it is hard to say just how intelligent dolphins are, as straightforward comparisons of species' relative intelligence are complicated by differences in sensory apparatus, response modes, and nature of cognition. Furthermore, the difficulty and expense of doing experimental work with large marine animals means that some tests that could meaningfully be done still have not been carried out, or have been carried out with inadequate sample size and methodology.